(ON CUE) From the home of the world's greatest musical events - Carnegie Hall, on 57th Street in New York City
CBS presents for the first time on television, the New York Philharmonic Young People's Concerts
under the musical direction of Leonard Bernstein.
(ON CUE . .) and here is Mr. Bernstein.
O.K., what do you think that music is all about?
That's just what I thought you'd say.....
cowboys and bandits and horses.
I know my little five-year-old daughter Jamie agrees with you.
When she heard me play this piece, she said -
"That's the Lone Ranger song, Hi-ho Silver!"
Well, I hate to disappoint her,
and you too,
but it isn't about the Lone Ranger at all.
It's about notes -
E Flats and F sharps.
No matter how many times people tell you stories about what music means,
forget them.
Stories are not what the music means at all.
Music is never about things.
Music just is.
It's a lot of beautiful notes and sounds put together so well that we get pleasure out of hearing them,
that's all.
When we ask "What does it mean -
what does this piece of music mean?",
we're asking a hard question.
And that's the question we're going to try to answer today.
It's a funny thing about this meaning business -
in music, anyway.
When you say "What does it mean?",
you're really saying
"What is it trying to tell me?",
or "What ideas
does it make me have?".
Just like words;
when you hear words, you get ideas from them.
If I say to you
"Ow, I burned my finger!",
then you understand certain things right away;
that I burned my finger,
that it hurts,
that I might not be able to play the piano any more,
that I have a loud ugly voice -
lots of different ideas like that.
But if I play you some notes
on the piano, like this-
the notes don't tell you any ideas;
these notes aren't about burning your finger,
or sputniks, or lampshades,
or anything.
What ARE they about?
They're about music.
For instance,
take this piece by Chopin.
Beautiful, isn't it?
But what's it about?
Nothing.
Or this Beethoven Sonata-
it's not about anything, either.
Or this boogie-woogie.
What's it about? Nothing.
They're all about nothing,
but they're all fun to listen to.
Why should they be fun to listen to?
I don't know; it's a
part of human nature to like to listen to music.
You see, notes aren't like words at all.
Because if I say even one single word all by itself,
like "rocket",
it means something; you get an idea right away; you see a picture in your mind.
Rocket: Bang!
But a note; one note all alone
means nothing.
It's just a plain old F sharp or a B flat.
A sound, that's all, higher or lower,
louder or softer - a sound that can seem very different
if I play it,
or I sing it
or if an oboe plays it
or a xylophone -
or a trombone
It's all the same note -
but with different sounds.
Now all music is a combination of
sounds
like this one
or this one
put together according to a plan.
The guy who plans it is the composer - whether he's called Rimsky-Korsakov or Richard Rodgers
and his plan
is to put the sounds together with rhythms and different instruments or voices -
in such a way
that what finally
comes out is exciting, or fun, or touching, or interesting, or all of these together.
That's called music; and what it means
SKIPPED is what the composer planned; but it's a musical plan, so it has a musical meaning, and
has nothing to do with any stories or pictures
or anything like that.
Of course if there is a story connected with a piece of music,
okay;
in a way, it gives an extra meanirg to the music;
but it's extra -- like mustard with your hot dog. Mustard isn't part of the hot dog, is it? Well the story isn't part of the music, either.
And so, whatever the music really mean?, it's not the story. We've got to find the real meaning in the music itself, in the way the notes are put together by the composer.
Now let's take that piece we played at the beginning. Remember?
SKIPPED A lot of people, like my little daughter,
think it means the Lone Ranger, horses,
cowboys, bandits, guns. A wild west piece
of music.
Well, it can't mean the Wild West,
for the simple reason that it was written
by a fellow who never heard of
the Wild West -
an Italian named Rossini.
We think his music means horses and cowboys
because we've been told so by the movies and television shows.
SKIPPED So we get into the habit of thinking of his music and of cowboys at the same time - one makes us think of the other. But it wasn't written to be about cowboys.
Rossini really wrote it
as an overture to an opera called "William Tell",
which is about people in Switzerland, which is pretty far from the Wild West.
SKIPPED You all know the story of William Tell, the man who had to shoot an apple off his little son's head with a bow and arrow - I'm sure you've heard the story.
Well, then, maybe the music is supposed to be about William Tell and Switzerland, instead of about cowboys.
Is that what it's about?
No!
It's not about William Tell or cowboys or lampshades or rockets or anything,
Then what makes it so exciting? Because of a million reasons:
but they're musical reasons.
For instances take the rhythm
which is like the rhythm of galloping horses
or like the rhythm of drums in a battle
but that doesn't mean the music is about horses or drums;
the meaning is only the excitement of that rhythm.
Another reason it's exciting is that it has a good tune,
easy to remember;
it starts with a phrase going up
and answers itself with a phrase going down.
It's like a question and answer.
Or maybe it's more like an argument,
with the second person winning it.
Let's have that argument now, you and me.
I'll sing the first phrase,
and you'11 argue back
with the second phrase.
Then I'll argue back with the third phrase
and you'll wind it up with the last one.
O.K.? Ready, go!
You win!
You see what excitement there is on that last phrase -
it has all the triumph and good feeling of
winning an argument.
But there are still more reasons why it's exciting;
for instance, the way it's played, the instruments that play it,
like the trumpets at the beginning,
or the violins, who use their bows in a jumping way to make that galloping sound, takata, takata.
And when all the violins do it together, it really gallops!
So you see, this music is exciting because it's written to be exciting,
not because of cowboys or William Tell's kid with an apple on his head. It's exciting for musical reasons, and no other reasons.
SKIPPED  So what the music means has to be found in the music, in the tunes, the orchestration, the rhythms - not in any story.
Well, if all that's true,
then why does a composer put names on his music at all?
Why doesn't he just write something called Symphony or Trio
or composition Number 28 or anything?
Why does he give his music a name, like "The Sorcerer's Apprentice",
or whatever it is,
if it's not important to the music?
Well every once in a while an artist will be stimulated to
express himself
by something outside himself --something he reads, or that happens to him, or something he sees.
Haven't you ever felt that way -that something happened to you that made you want to
sing, or dance, or express your feelings in some way? Sure-- all of you know that feeling.
Well, it's the same with a composer;
SKIPPED let's say he has just read a poem by Goethe called "The Sorcerer's Apprentice". And it struck him with such power that it made him feel like writing music. So he writes a piece called "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" -that's all. But the question isn't what the name of the piece is or whether it's about a Sorcerer or Mickey Mouse; the question is whether the music is good.
Johann Strauss wrote lots of waltzes,
and one of them goes like this:
For example, do you know the name of this one?
The Blue Danube!
Now, does that have anything to do with the Danube River?
No.
Now this is called
--what?
Response.
Why couldn't that be called "The Blue Danube"
or "The Emperor Waltz" or anything.
A Strauss waltz by any other name is still just a lovely waltz.
The name doesn't matter, except to help you tell one apart from the other,
and maybe give the music a little more color, like a fancy dress costume.
Now I'm going to try a trick with you.
We're going to play a piece that has a story,
but I'm going to tell you the wrong story.
I'm just going to make one up out of my head,
without telling you the real name of this piece;
and you see if the story and the music don't go together just as well
as if it were the real story.
O.K., here goes.
In the middle of a big city
stands an enormous jail, full of prisoners
It's midnight and they're all asleep
except for one who can't sleep because he was put in jail unjustly.
He spends the whole night
practicing his kazoo
while the other prisoners snore all around him.
But this kazoo-playing prisoner
has a friend who is going to come and rescue him -
Superman!
So Superman comes charging along through the alley on his motorcycle.
whistling his secret whistle so the prisoner will know he's coming.
As he gets near the prison,
he hears all the prisoners snoring away peacefully in the dead silence of the night.
And he also hears his friend playing his kazoo over the snoring,
which gets louder as he gets nearer.
Suddenly, he charges into the prison yard and bops the guard over the head.
The kazoo stops playing, and with all the snoring still going on,
he grabs his friend and carries him away on his motorcycle!
The snoring gets farther, and farther away, until we don't hear it at all anymore.
And our hero arrives at last to freedom!
Now let's hear how this sounds all put together.
Now all that makes good sense, doesn't it? But it's not the real story at all.
What this piece really is, is a part of a much longer piece called "Don Quixote" by Richard Strauss;
and Strauss was trying to tell a whole other story in this music.
Don Quixote is the name of a silly old man, back in the days of knights and armour and horseback -
a foolish old man who read too many books about knighthood and conquering armies for his beautiful lady,
and who decided he was a marvelous knight himself.
So off he goes on his skinny, bony old horse,
to conquer the world.
He has with him a companion named Sancho Panza, a little fat, jolly
fellow,
who is very faithful to his master, but is a sensible type who knows his master is a little coockoo.
And so we hear him laughing at old Don Quixote.
Suddenly, the old knight sees a flock of sheep in the field going Baa-baa
And with them is a sheperd playing on his pipe, as all shepherds do.
Don Quixote, thinks the sheep are an army specially put there for him to
conquer,
so in he rides with his sword flashing.
And the sheep run off in all directions, baa-ing wildly.
He is convinced he has done a truly knightly deed, and he is proud!
Here we go, with the real story in mind.
Now was that music any different from what we played before?
"NO!"
Is it more exciting or more fun, or better music? (KIDS: NO!)
Does it have any different meaning? No. It's exactly the same,
only the story is different.
SKIPPED What's the difference whether this is Superman's secret whistle. or Sancho Panza laughing? It's still the same funny tune. And if this is a shepherd playing his pipe. It can also be a prisoner playing his Kazoo.
In fact, there are a hundred other stories I could have made up about this piece,
but the music would still have been just as good or just as bad as it is without any story at all.
Do you see what I mean?
Now, later in this same "Don Quixote" piece there is a part about another adventure the old fellow has; when he and his friend Sancho Panza
have a wild ride through the air.
In this part there is even a wind-machine in the orchestra
to give you the feeling of the wind whistling by as they whoosh up and down through the clouds.
But why couldn't this music be describing the flight of a jet plane?
Or a satellite moon whistling around in its orbit:
or even another old man snoring?
Let's make believe it is about a jet plane, and see how the music fits.
Isn't that exciting music?
No matter what it's about; it's exciting
because the music is exciting, and for no other reason.
CUT (possible cut from * to *) *Now here is the ending of "Don Quixote" by Strauss; this last part is supposed to tell us the sad story of how the old man dies, dreaming of his beautiful lady, and of his noble adventures. It's one of the most beautiful pieces of music ever written, slow and singing; and it features a solo by the cello, which will be played by Mr. Varga, But I want you to listen to it as if it didn't tell any story at all, except its own musical story - the way the melodies weave around, and the chords change, and instruments change. I think you'll find it just as wonderful music as if you were following the story - maybe even more wonderful, because then there's no story to get in the way and take your mind off the music itself. Listen to how beautiful it is.
CUT CONT. Isn't that a beauty? And it's especially beautiful when you don's have to think of a story while you're listening to it.*
Now that's enough talk about music that tells stories. Let's take a big giant step now toward finding out what music means
by listening to some music that deesn't try to tell a story, but only tried
to paint a picture, in a general sort of way, or to describe an atmosphere. The look of something,
or the feel of something - like a sunrise, or a night in the woods, or an old haunted house.
Now we're getting closer to real musical meaning, because we don't have a story to think about while we're listening.
All we have to think of is a general idea,
SKIPPED or a picture, and a picture doesn't get in the way of the music as much as a story does, because it hasn't got a lot of details to worry about - like the prisoner and the saxophone, and Superman arriving and leaving and all that.
So you can concentrate more on the music and enjoy it more.
For instance, take Beethoven's Sixth Symphony.
Here is a great wonderful piece, full of fine tunes and great rhythms and marvelous spirit - happy, driving,
peaceful, - all kinds of things. But in Beethoven's mind
this symphony was tied up with the idea of the countryside -
farmers and brooks and birds and shepherds. So he called it the Pastoral Symphony - as you know, pastoral means
anything to do with the country.
At the beginning of the first movement
he wrote the words:	"Happy feelings at arriving in the country";
and the music goes like this:
It sure sounds happy, cheerful, pretty.
But these feelings could be happy for any other reason, too;
supposing Beethoven had said "Happy feelings because my uncle left me a million dollars,"
or "Happy feelings because my bellyache went away" -
he could still have written this happy music, and it would be just as good, just as happy.
SKIPPED So the fact that Beethoven was happy because he left town and walked in the fields doesn't really matter so much, does it? What does matter is that the music is so cheerful and makes us cheerful when we hear it.
Now, let's try something; let's change the title of this piece, and call it
"Happy feelings because I was just given a new puppy"
- and let let's listen to it with that in mind and see if it sounds any different.
It's still the same happy music, isn't it, whether it's on account of the countryside or a new puppy.
Beethoven calls the second movement "Scene by the Brooke."
And the motion of the music is supposed to imitate, or suggest,
the motion of the water in the brook.
But supposing we call it "Asleep in the Hammock,"
and the motion is now of quiet rocking instead of water -
let's see how the music sounds then.
Doesn't change a thing, does it,
whether it's water or a hammock? It's the same lovely music.
At the end of this movement, Beethoven
introduces some bird-calls..... the sound
of the cuckoo,
SKIPPED to the quail, and the nightingale
Now there you've got me; how can I deny
that here the music means birds in the
trees beside that old brook? But I can
deny it. Sure, they are bird-calls; but
birds sing, after all, and singing is
music so again, there we are, dealing
with music, not with birds. And listen
to what sweet music it is.
Now one of the best pieces that paint
pictures is by Mussorgsky - a Russian
composer --
-- who wrote a piece called "Pictures at
an Exhibition."
What he did was to take a lot of pictures hanging on the wall in a museum and
write music that he thought could describe them -
in other words, to try and do with notes what the painter had done with paint.
But of course notes can't do what paint can do;
you can't draw a nose with notes,
or a building or a sunset.
But you can sort of do it.
Anyone. Here's one of those Mussorgsky pictures; --
--it shows children playing in a park;
and what Mussorgsky did to make it sound like kids playing
was to imitate the way kids talk when they play games
- which is almost like singing:
ALLEE ALLEE ... FREE
Or when kids are making fun of each other,
and go (SING-) "Nya nya, nya nya."
Listen,
Then there's another picture Mussorgsky painted with notes;
of many little chickens not yet out of their egg-shells.
Listen to how he imitates their squawking and pecking.
Then the last one; where he paints a big gate in the city of Kiev -
- a tremendous stone structure. Now you can see what Mussorgsky had in his mind,
when you hear these great big strong chords, like pillars holding up those tons of stone.
That made you think of a big gate, didn't it?
Yes!
Yes - but only because I told you beforehand that you were supposed to think of a gate.
If I'd told you to think instead of the Mississippi River flowing majestically down the middle of America,
you would have seen that in your mind.
So again - there's the old answer; the picture that goes with music goes with it only because the composer SAYS so;
but it's not really part of the music. It's extra.
Now we're going to take another giant step toward finding out the answer to our first question "What does music mean?"
And this is a really big step; we're getting closer now to the answer!
We're going to forget about all the pieces of music that tell stories or paint pictures- we've had enough of that
- and we're going to listen to music that describes emotions, feelings
- like pain, or happiness, or anger, or loneliness, or excitement, or love.
I guess most music is like that;
and the better it is, the more it will make you feel the emotions that the composer felt when he wrote it.
Chaikovsky was a composer who did this - who always tried to have his music mean something emotional.
Take this part of his 4th Symphony ---
I guess the best way to describe it is that it has the feeling of wanting something very badly that you can't have.
Did you ever feel you wanted something more than anything else in the world;
and you said so, and they said no, and you
said it again - "I want it!"
And again they said no, and again you said, louder and more excited, "I want it!" and again, more excited "I want it!"
until it seemed that something would break inside you and there's nothing left to do but cry?
That's like this music
Then something breaks in your head:
and you cry,
Listen to the orchestra play it now, and see if you don't feel that emotion.
Did you feel it?
Now sometimes Chaikovsky uses the same tune to describe two different emotions.
At the beginning of his 5th Symphony he writes this tune,
for instance which sounds sad and gloomy and depressed.
But at the end of the symphony, he changes a couple of notes
- what musicians call changing from minor to major
- and it all comes out joyful and triumphant,
like someone who has just made a touchdown and is the hero of the football game.
Didn't the music make you feel like the winner?
How we can really understand what the meaning of music is; it's the way it makes you feel when you hear it.
Finally, we've taken the last giant step, and we're there, we can understand music now.
We don't have to know a lot of stuff about sharps and flats and chords to understand music;
if it tell us something - not a story or a picture - but a feeling
- if it makes us change inside, and have those different good feelings music can make us have, then we are understanding it.
That's all there is to it. Because those feelings aren't like the stories and pictures we talked about before;
they're not extra; they're not outside the music; they belong to the music;
they're what music is about.
And the most wonderful thing of all is that there's no limit to the different kinds of feelings music can make you have.
And some of those feelings are so special they can't even be described in words.
You see, we can't always name things we feel.
Sometimes we can; like joy, or sadness,or love, or hate, or peacefulness.
But there are other feelings so deep and special that we have no words for them
and that's where music is so marvellous;
it names the feelings for us, only in notes instead of words.
It's all in the way music moves - we must never forget that music is movement,
always going somewhere, shifting and changing, and flowing,
from one note to another;
and that movement can tell us more about the way we feel than a million words can.
Here's a tiny piece by a modern composer named Webern,
who writes music that's so special in its sounds,
that some people don't understand it all and just call it crazy modern music.
But I know that young people can understand the special feelings in this music better than older people,
and so I'd like to play it for you.
Pretty special, isn't it?
But that's just the wonder of music,
that there's no limit to the different kinds of feelings it can make you have.
For instance.... If I just hold this one
note for a long time --
-- it means nothing, all by itself; it's not moving.
But the minute I play it and then move to another note
--- right away there's a meaning - a meaning we can't name,
something like a stretch, or a pushing, or a pulling, whatever you want - but it's there.
The meaning is in the way the music moves, and it makes something happen
inside of you.
If I move from that first note to a different one ----
---- the meaning changes - something else happens inside of you
- the stretch is bigger, somehow, and stronger.
Now this note ---
----means one thing with this chord
under it --
and it makes you feel a certain way----but it means something else with
this other chord under it.
And it makes you have a different feeling.
These notes --- Do you know what they are?
Well, they mean something spooky and exciting is going to happen,
like "Dragnet"; but the same notes played in a different way --
SKIPPED What do they mean to you? (KIDS RESPOND)
So you see, the meaning of music is to be found in its melodies, in its
harmonies, in its rhythms,
in its orchestral color, in the way it develops
itself. That's maybe the most important
part - how music develops and grows
from the beginning of a piece to its
end -
and that's what we're going to talk about at another concert in the
near future.
But right now, all you have to know is that music has its own meanings, right there for you to feel inside the music;
and you don't need any stories or pictures
to tell you what it means.
If you like music at all, you'll find out the meanings
for yourselves, just by listening;
SKIPPED And most people do like music, so why shouldn't you?
So now, I want you all to listen to one short piece with no explanation from anybody.
SKIPPED I think by now you're ready for it - just to listen, without any hints.
I'm not going to tell you anything about it, except its name and
who wrote it,
SKIPPED but no stories and no pictures.
And you just all sit back and relax,and enjoy it, listen to the notes,
feel them move around, jumping, hopping, bumping, flashing, sliding,
and just enjoy THAT without a whole lot of fuss about stories and pictures.
The piece we're going to play is called "La Valse", and it was written by Ravel.
I think you'll like it because it's fun to listen to - not because it's about anything. It's just good, exciting music.
SKIPPED  (ON CUE) CBS Television has presented the first in a series of four concerts by the New York Philharmonic under the musical direction of Leonard Bernstein.The next concert in the Young People's series will be presented on Saturday February 1. At that time Mr. Bernstein subject will be "_____ "; and will feature the music of...........(ON CUE) This program has come to you live from Carnegie Hall in New York.